---
layout: post
title:  Obligatory "Hello World!" and Reflections on CS
date:   2014-04-05 19:48:42
tags:   computer-science
---

Hello! Здравствуйте! こんにちは！Unicode test!

If you can read that, then congratulations! Your OS/browser is not broken.

I finally took the plunge and created a blog. Here I hope to be able to
materialize and archive information on topics that I learn about or find
interest in, and perhaps even explore some original ideas of my own. Thus,
without further ado...

## Hello world!

Phew.

Instead of diving into further introductory ceremony, I think it best to begin
with a reflection on what in all likelihood will be the core topic that I will
be writing about.

# [Computer Science](#computer-science) {#computer-science}

Ah, yes. Computer science. The arcane art pursued by many a young and old
alike, and at the same time the most contemporary coolness permeating the world
of tech.

The [beginnings of computer
science](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_science#History), though, had a
slightly shifted focus. The days of startups, enterprise systems, and big data
were in the distant future. At the time, the areas of study were, naturally,
more fundamental. From [Ada
Lovelace](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_Lovelace), who is credited with
writing the first algorithm designed for a computational machine, to [Alan
Turing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing), a mathematician who defined
a hypothetical [universal
computer](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Turing_machine) and used it to
prove certain properties about computability, early computer science was
explored largely from a mathematical perspective. As electronic computers began
to be manufactured, the practical application of computer science became
increasingly relevant, and computer science as a field expanded to a [multitude
of
disciplines](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_science#Areas_of_computer_science).

Today, computer technology and software development have become integral parts
of society. Programming, besides conjuring up stereotypical images of
sunlight-deprived individuals sitting in front of a monitor hacking away on a
massive keyboard, has become an important industry profession. This has
naturally led to certain levels of specializations (e.g. web, system, graphics,
etc.) among most aspects of programming, including jobs, languages, and
tooling.

A consequence of this, though, is that it not all fields of programming require
deep knowledge of the classic fundamental aspects of computer science for day
to day work.

Well, we can't have that, now, can we?

# [Areas of Interest](#areas-of-interest) {#areas-of-interest}

The disciplines that make up computer science can be broadly classified as
either [theoretical computer science](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theoretical_computer_science)
or [applied computer science](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_science#Applied_computer_science).

